In this short video,
we're going to talk about
a really common task in
applied data science,
which is the resampling
of time data.
This is often done
when you have say,
intermittent data
which you want to
make more regular
or when you have
really fine-grained
data and you want to
get more general
trends out of it.
So we're going to bring in Pandas
and we're going to
bring in numpy,
and I also want to
bring in matplotlib,
which is a plotting library
and you'll learn
more about that in
a subsequent lecture.
So resampling refers
to the process of
converting a time series from
one frequency to another.
Converting from
a higher frequency to
lower frequency is
called down-sampling,
and the other way around
is called up-sampling.
There's another type of
sampling as well which is
neither up-sampling
or down-sampling,
and it's changing
a weekly Wednesday value
into a weekly Sunday value
for instance.
Resampling is useful and
commonly used in manipulating
time-related data.
So let's see how
it's done in Pandas.
So first, let's create
some date-time index
using the date range function.
We can either set
the start or end
and specify the frequency
and number of periods.
So I'm going to set
it to January 21st,
2018 in the end to May 31st,
2018, and use the dates in
creating series with
random numbers.
So here, we just use this nice
pd.date range to get our index,
and then we create a new series.
I'll just put in some random data
and set our index
to the dates and let's
look at the head of that.
So let's try some down-sampling.
Two important things need to
be considered when down-sampling.
First, which side of
the interval is closed?
Let's say that we want to convert
daily frequency to
weekly frequency,
you need to chop up the data
into one-week intervals.
Each interval is said
to be half open.
A data point can only
belong to one interval and
the union of the intervals
must make up
the whole time frame.
Secondly, we need to decide how
the new aggregated bins
should be labeled.
Either from the start
of the interval
or the end of the interval.
So let's look at an example
using the series that
we just created.
Here we want to convert
daily to weekly.
We can use the resample function.
The resample function has
parameters for specifying
the new frequency,
which side is closed.
After that, we have
to decide what kind
of aggregate function we want
to do with the interval.
So I'm going to specify
the frequency as weekly,
which is w, and at
the close side is right,
and use the aggregation
function as mean.
So just do ts.resample,
I want w for weekly frequency.
I want it to be
closed on the right,
and then on that I'm going
to run the mean function,
and then let's just look
at the head of that.
So let's just take
a look under the hood.
What is this object that's
actually being
returned by resample?
So let's take a look at the type
of this ts.resample object.
So it's a date time
index resampler.
So this object allows us
to resample pretty much
however we want through
the use of the agg() function,
but it also holds many of
the common functions
we might want to use,
such as mean as we just saw.
For instance, if we just
wanted to count all
of the data values that
were being re-sampled,
we could use len and
write our own Lambda.
So let's, ts.resample, again
weekly closed on the right,
and now I'm going to run.agg(),
and in that, I'm just going
to pass in my own Lambda.
So Lambda x, and we'll just
emit the length of x.head.
So we see that they're all seven,
which makes sense based on how we
created our time series.
If we pay attention to
the bottom of the output,
where it says the
frequency is "W.Sun",
it means weekly on a Sunday.
If we wanted to do
another day, for instance,
Wednesday, we could do "W.Wed."
After converting the frequency,
Pandas also allows us to adjust
the labels with
the loffset parameter.
If we changed the daily
frequency to monthly frequency,
and set the loffset to -1d,
which is a month backward.
Let's see an example.
Actually it's -1m.
So ts.resample monthly, we
want it closed on the right,
but now we can
actually tell it that
we want the labels
to change as well.
So we want to take
the label on the right,
and then we want to offset
by minus one month,
and let's look at
the mean of that.
Another popular and
useful approach to
aggregate is to compute four
values for each bucket.
The first, last, maximum,
and minimum values.
By using the ohlc() function,
we can get a data-frame with
the new frequency indices
and four columns containing
the four values at each period.
So ts.resample monthly,
closed on the right,
we're going to take
our label and offset and
then we're going to
call .oh lc() on it,
and this is going to
run a function on
the resample object and
create for us four
different aggregate values.
So here we can see
open, high, low,
and close for each of
the monthly cadences that we
set. So this is pretty cool.
We were able to
resample it and create
these four different values
right off the get-go.
This is actually pretty
common financial data
routine as you might guess
from the names of the columns.
But you can of course
write your own functions
and pass them to agg,
or apply as you see fit.
So when you're doing resampling,
you don't have to do manual
groupbys yourself,
and instead you can have
the resample routines
in Pandas take care
of it for you,
but you can add your aggregation
functions as you see fit.
So now let's talk
about up-sampling.
Since we're converting
lower-frequency
to higher-frequency,
there's no need to aggregate.
We can use the asfreq method to
convert to a higher frequency
without any aggregation.
So let's create a data-frame with
two weekly indices
and four columns.
So first the indices,
we're going to set
our start to 1/1/2018,
every two and we'll set
the frequency to w,
and now let's fill
in the dataframe.
So df= pd.DataFrame,
and just as per normal,
we're just going to
create a bunch of
fake data and let's look
at the head of this.
Now, we up-sample from
weekly frequency to
daily frequency.
We would use the
resample function with
frequency to "D" and
the asfreq method.
So df=df.resample
('D') and.asfreq,
and let's look at
the head of that.
So as you notice,
there's going to be
all these NaN values
in some cells
because we're up-sampling
and we do not have
any data for the new intervals.
If you want to build
the NaN values,
and this is called interpolation,
you can either use ffill,
which we've talked about and is
forward filling, or bfill,
which is backward filling,
or you can use
fillna or re-index methods
of course afterwards.
In our data-frame,
it makes sense to do
forward filling now. So
let's give it a try.
So df.resample ('D'), and then we
can just call ffill
on this. There we go.
We've see that the
values are propagated.
We can also choose to only fill
a certain number of periods
by using the limit parameter
and the ffill function.
For instance, I
might want to limit
to interpolating
just three observations.
So at resample.ffill
limit equals three.
An important group of
manipulation techniques
on time series are focused
on over a sliding window or
with exponentially
decaying weights.
Now I'm not going to
talk about the latter,
but I'm going to talk
about the former,
and this is very
useful for smoothing
noisy or gappy data.
Note that these kinds
of functions
automatically exclude
missing data.
So keep that in mind.
Now, let's look examples
using the stock market.
This is a very common data
for time series analysis,
and we are going to
look at Apple and
Microsoft's daily stock prices
from 2012 to 2018.
So Apple is "datasets/ APPL.csv"
and Microsoft is in
"datasets/ MSFT.csv."
Let's look at the head of
what Apple's looks like.
As we see here, we have
these different pricing for
different times of the opening
and closing and so forth.
For the analysis that
we're going to do,
we're going to use
the close price.
So let's combine Apple and
Microsoft's daily prices
together into one data-frame.
So I'll create
some new data-frame, Apple,
I just want to be
the close price and
we'll just name
that up to the ticker label,
APPL, and Microsoft,
I just wanted to be
their close price and we'll
name that after MSFT,
and let's look at
the head of that.
Okay. So now we just have
these two stock closing prices.
Now, let's plot those prices
over the years.
So I'm going to use a
df.plot and plt.show.
We haven't talked about these.
You'll learn more about
plotting in subsequent course.
Okay. So there we can
see our two plots,
Apple much higher throughout
the period and higher
volatility as well,
and then Microsoft is below.
So now we're going to learn
the rolling operator,
which behaves similarly
to resample and groupby.
So there's a lot of
parallelism here.
It can be called on a series
or on a data-frame
along with a window,
which is the number
of periods to cover.
The number we specify in
the rolling function means
the sliding window that we're
actually going to group by.
So for example, if
we're going to do
100 that is grouping
over 100 days
sliding window because
our current data
is in day periods.
If they were on second periods,
that would be a 100
seconds and so forth.
So here, let's say
100 day rolling window
and we're going to
average values.
So we'd say df.rolling over 100.
So this is essentially groupby
or resampling into new periods.
We're going to take
the mean values over those 100,
and we're just going to
plot that right away,
and so let's show that plot.
So you can see that this
not only smooth the data,
but then we lost the big drop at
the end of the time period for
Apple because of
the size of our window.
So try playing around with
a few window values
yourself to get a sense for
how that might
change the insights
that you might derive
from the data.
Now, we've just touched
on the very basics of
manipulating time
series data in Python.
These techniques will be
useful for conducting
further time
series analysis and for
more advanced data visualization
on time-related data,
as well as when dealing with
feature engineering from
time series sources.
If you continue to
use time series data,
maybe you've got a project
with one of our capstones,
where you want to use
time series data,
you'll be spending
a lot of time with
the Pandas libraries
for time series,
and I really encourage you to
check out the documentation.
It's quite significant.
It's one of the biggest
features within
Pandas for data science,
and really brought
it to the forefront.